# Section 2: The Rise and Decline of Keynesian Economics

However, the Great Depression (GD) triggered by the stock crash in the United States from 1929 to 1933 which swept through the significant economies shook the public’s trust in economists, thus shaking economists’ trust in the market and even the economics itself.

According to the theory of supply and demand that will be introduced later, the market can adjust demand and supply through price changes so that they are always equal. However, it seemed that the orthodox theories in economics could not explain the phenomena of overproduction (i.e. the supply of products exceeds the demand), continuous price decline (deflation, i.e. the demand of money exceeds the supply) and high unemployment rate (i.e. the supply of labor exceeds the demand) during the GD. 

Especially the “Say’s Law” which believed that “supply would automatically create demand equal to itself” was regarded as an infallible law at that time. From the perspective of it, supply and demand could not be out of balance, let alone for a long time.

During the GD, there was a bitter joke: A son asked his father, “Why don’t we buy coal for warming during this cold winter?” The father replied, “Because I lost my job, we have no money to buy coal.” The son asked again, “Why did you lose your job?” The father replied, “Because the coal company I worked for could not sell out the coals and went bankrupt, we as the employees were all fired.”

Here is what the history textbooks record: President Roosevelt of the US stood up at this critical moment to implement the “New Deal” and turned the tide by government interventions in the market, saving the US economy, ending the GD, also ending the history of letting the free market spontaneously adjust the national economy, and starting the era of big government.

Some views of Keynesian economics have been taught in the ideological and political education of middle school in China. It is the story in textbooks: British economist John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946) wrote his “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money” in which he criticized the orthodox economics that advocated the free market, and then established a set of theories analyzing the national economy and advocating government interventions in the market.

Unfortunately, these so-called “historical facts” which are vividly described in textbooks are wrong because of severe misunderstanding and misinterpretation. Friedman, the founder of the monetary school, co-authored with Anna Jacobsen Schwartz (1915-2012) “A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960”. With a large number of facts, excellent statistical skills and dominant monetary theory, Friedman discovered the truth of this period of history by strict logical economic analysis, completely overturning previous understanding of the causes of the GD.
Roosevelt’s New Deal was implemented earlier than Keynes’s “The General Theory”. On the contrary, Keynes was inspired to write his book by Roosevelt’s New Deal.
However, it was not Roosevelt’s New Deal that freed the US from the GD, but war! The unemployment rate is a definite proof. At the beginning of the GD, the unemployment rate in the US was as high as 25%, which means one in four was unemployed. Later, the rate was reduced to about 10% due to the automatic adjustment of the market and the public works of the New Deal, but it was still severe unemployment. It was not until after the US went to the World War II that the problem of high unemployment had been really solved because many people joined the army to fight overseas, which significantly reduced the supply of labor, and the increasing demand for the war materials boosted the demand for labor. Only then did the US truly get rid of the GD. It was in 1929 that the stock market crashed, and it was in 1941 after the attack on Pearl Harbor that the US went to war, while it was since 1933 that Roosevelt’s New Deal had been implemented when he became president, so there are nearly ten years between them. If the New Deal was effective, the problem of high unemployment rate should have been solved.

Besides Roosevelt tried to get rid of the GD with New Deal, Hitler also led the Germans to another road of self-rescue by starting a war, extricated Germany from the crisis much faster than the US, and even dominated the European continent, of course just temporarily.

There is an idiom in China called “quenching thirst with poison”. If it is judged whether it is useful only from whether it can quench thirst (get rid of the GD), poison (Hitler’s militarism) also works, but the final result is death. However, Keynes’s prescription is also a chronic poison, and just because its toxicity cannot be observed immediately, it seemed at the beginning to be effective, just as when Hitler came to power, he seemed to save Germany out of crisis overnight. So Keynesian economics was thought to be the remedy of economic diseases caused by market failure, and was widely used in almost all economies after World War II.

Keynes was so ambitious that he originally intended to replace the traditional economics since Adam Smith completely. However, some economists made a compromise that traditional economics was also right, except that the scope of application was different from Keynesian economics. The former focuses on how the micro-entities in the market such as individuals and enterprises consume, produce and exchange guided by price. And the latter is concerned about how government closely monitors the national economy, just like a doctor caring for patients, and prescribes according to Keynesian economics to regulate the economy, ensuring that it moves forward on a healthy track. So these economists separate traditional economics from Keynesian economics, arguing that they apply to different fields, just like physics.

Thus, the traditional economics is renamed as “microeconomics”, and Keynesian economics is called “macroeconomics”. By the way, it was Keynes’s father who first introduced the concepts of micro and macro into economics from physics. This compromise of the traditional economics and Keynesian economics is known as “Neoclassical Synthesis” which includes both market mechanisms advocated by neoclassical economics and government regulations or interventions in the market by Keynesian economics. However, Keynes himself did not agree with neoclassical synthesis. Even Keynes and Keynesian School are of different opinions. In Keynesian School, neoclassical factors are added into Keynesian economics. For example, the IS-LM Model is established by this school instead of Keynes.

However, in the 1970s, the sequela of governments taking Keynes’s prescription for long terms finally broke out. If the end of World War II in 1945 is taken as the starting point, it just took less than 30 years. Seen from the angle of long history, it was not a very chronic poisoning. It should be the oil crisis in the 1970s that accelerated the outbreak of the sequela, and a new term “stagflation” spread quickly, which was a phenomenon that Keynesian economics could not explain. In Keynesian economics, inflation and economic stagnation should replace each other, and could occur at the same time.

There have been questions on Keynes in economics, which was just not noticed by the public before. The Monetary School led by Friedman came first, followed by the Supply School and the Rational Expectation School. The neoclassical synthesis was also criticized to divide economics into micro and macro with entirely different application scope and irrelevant to each other. Some economists advocate “supplementation of the micro foundation for macro” which means that macroeconomics should be rebuilt based on microeconomics or neoclassical economics. However, it is more thorough that economics should not be divided into micro and macro at all!
