# Section 4: The Causes of the Great Depression

In the previous section, we have introduced briefly the history of economics from the classical period to the neoclassical period and how it “split” into micro and macro. Next, the causes of the Great Depression will be explained to illustrate why Keynesian economics was not the proper remedy to macro-economy, but just a chronic poison.

It is well known that the Great Depression began with the crash of the United States stock market in 1929. However, it is not well known that there were stock crashes more severe than that of 1929 both before and after the GD, but they all did not cause such disastrous consequences.

Some may argue that there were not many investors in the stock market before 1929, so the severe stock crashes occurred in the past did not have so massive impacts as that of 1929. However, after 1929, there are more and more investors in the stock market. Why have more serious stock crashes not brought about as severe consequences as the GD? They may argue that after 1929, governments had Keynes’s prescription to prevent the spread of the stock crashes to macro-economy by intervention with the market. However, during the colonial period in Hong Kong, British-Hong Kong (BHK) government had been implementing the policy of “positive non-intervention” until it was terminated by the last Governor Chris Patten. Hong Kong was the last piece of land on the earth where Smith’s classical thought of “government only needs to play the role of night watchman” was still followed in modern society. During this period, Hong Kong had experienced some stock crashes not less severe than that of the US in 1929. Moreover, the BHK government had never taken any Keynesian prescriptions, but Hong Kong survived unscathed again and again, and the impacts of the stock crashes had never spread to macro-economy of Hong Kong and turned into economic crises.

Why? The answer is also the truth of the GD. The truth is: the cause of the stock crash in the US in 1929 was utterly different from that of most stock crashes. The real cause of that stock crash was also the real cause of the economic crisis which the stock crash later turned into. In other words, the stock crash is just the prelude to the GD, not the cause of it. A stock crash alone will not necessarily cause an economic crisis. However, neither will an economic crisis necessarily turn into a great depression. It was a series of mishandling by the US government that turned an ordinary economic crisis that had happened many times before into an unprecedented economic catastrophe - the Great Depression!

Friedman in his “A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960” traced back in detail the data of money supply before and after the stock crash in 1929, eloquently showing that before 1929, the US central bank (the Federal Reserve, or the Fed) injected a large amount of money into the economy. The later lecture of “Monetary Theory” in this book will expound that if the growth of the money supply is out of line with that of the real economy, there will be inflation. However, people (even economists) at that time knew little about monetary theory. That is why the truth or real cause of the GD has been misunderstood for long.

When producers found that the price (nominal price) of goods was rising, they would think that their products were so popular in the market that the demand exceeded the supply. With the stimulus of rising price, they significantly increased production and employed more workers. Because the demand for labor increased, with the limited labor supply, the wage also increased. Workers found that their wages increased, and producers found their profits increased. Everyone found his income increased, and all spent more, so in the short term, the increased supply seemed to be consumed by the increased demand. Investors also spent more money in the stock market, firstly because more income would naturally lead to more savings (the so-called “investment” in the stock market is the same as savings in economics), and secondly because the increase in profits of enterprises made investors full of confidence in the rise of stock prices. As long as there are enough investors who had such confidence, and more chose to buy in stocks instead of selling out, the stock prices would keep rising.

However, everything had an end. It was too much money flowing into the economy that caused “Money Illusion” in the short term, which made people not know that the general rise in prices was inflation, not real economic growth. The illusion is after all only an illusion, not reality. What was praised by the historians as the “roaring 1920s” was just an illusion of prosperity stimulated by inflation in the eyes of the economists. Sooner or later, producers would find that everything was more expensive, not just their products, and their costs also increased, squeezing their profits, so they no longer expanded the productions, but shrank. Consumers also would find that everything was more expensive, not just their incomes, so they cut back on spending. All of a sudden, the wind changed, and the stock market is the most sensitive to the change of economic wind, so the stock price suddenly turned to plummet. Previously, due to the soaring stock prices, a large number of funds that could not bear high risks (such as bank deposits) were attracted into the stock market. The sudden collapse of stock prices wiped out these funds overnight. As a result, several banks went bankrupt, triggering a crisis of confidence in banks. Even the banks that had no problems in trouble were drawn into a run on the banks.
These problems in finance quickly spread to the real economy where there was overproduction caused by the illusion of inflation. It is necessary to realize that the overproduction was not the fault of the market at all! It was the central bank (the Fed) that issued too much money, which led to inflation and misled producers into thinking that the rise in product prices was due to the rise in demand, but it was wrong. What had risen was only money supply, so the nominal or monetary price of goods increased, but the real or relative price of goods had not changed at all. Nevertheless, how could producers know that? In a monetary society, what producers could directly observe is the monetary price of their products, and could not know if the central bank had issued too many money, so they would respond to the price rising by expanding productions. If the price as a signal for the demand and supply had been distorted by inflation, the producers’ response would be wrong, because the increased supply had no corresponding increase in demand to consume. That is precisely the real reason why there is a so-called overproduction.

The traditional economics (the so-called microeconomics) thinks that the market will pass information about supply and demand to various economic entities by the rise and fall of prices. Prices will rise when demand exceeds supply and fall when demand exceeds supply. All economic entities are self-interested or rational to respond accordingly: when prices rise, producers increase supply and consumers reduce demand; while when prices fall, producers reduce supply and consumers increase demand. These responses are all pushing the changes of supply and demand to be equal. Therefore, it is inconceivable that there will be overproduction for traditional economics. However, the problem lies in the fact that there is money in reality, and the central bank may implement wrong monetary policies due to ignorance or intentionally – before the GD, the Fed were ignorant, but most of the inflations were initiated intentionally. The wrong monetary policy will lead to instability of the money value which appears as the monetary price out of line with the real one. Thus, the information implied by the money prices is not only about supply and demand, but also mixed with the “noise” of inflation, which misleads producers (in fact, including consumers) to respond not to push the changes of supply and demand to be equal, but to be unequal.

Is this the fault of market or government (central bank)? Who has distorted the price? Who has made the information implied by monetary price mixed with the noise of inflation? Who has misled producers and consumers?

There was an even more terrible story to come. The inequality of supply and demand caused the stock crash, which caused a bank crisis. The sharp contraction of the money supply caused by the bank crisis will, in turn, worsen the economic crisis, which will be explained in the later lecture of “Monetary Theory”. In a word, according to the monetary theory understood only by later economists, central bank should increase the money supply when the economy was in recession. However, the Fed did not realize that it had made a mistake of injecting too much money into the economy until after the stock crash, and suddenly changed the monetary policy to tighten the money supply, which is precisely the opposite of what they should do in a financial crisis. It was so dramatic, and it should be said to be tragic! In order to correct a mistake made before, a more significant mistake had been made at the wrong time.

As a result, the US economy worsened from an economic crisis characterized by overproduction which had happened before, to a great depression characterized by a continuous sharp fall in prices (severe deflation). The price could not even make up for the cost of transporting the products to the market, so producers chose to destroy them all on the spot to reduce the loss. That was the reason why there were the ridiculous phenomena recorded in history textbooks: milk was poured into the river, and chickens were drowned in the water, instead of being sold out.
